COMMAND NAME: gpinitstandby

Adds and/or initializes a standby master host for a Greenplum Database system.


*****************************************************
SYNOPSIS
*****************************************************

gpinitstandby { -s <standby_hostname> [-P <port>] | -r | -n } 

[-a] [-q] [-D] [-S <standby data directory>] [-l <logfile_directory>]

gpinitstandby -? | -v


*****************************************************
DESCRIPTION
*****************************************************

The gpinitstandby utility adds a backup, standby master host to your 
Greenplum Database system. If your system has an existing standby master 
host configured, use the -r option to remove it before adding the new 
standby master host. 

Before running this utility, make sure that the Greenplum Database 
software is installed on the standby master host and that you have 
exchanged SSH keys between the hosts. It is recommended that the master 
port is set to the same port number on the master host and the backup 
master host. 

See the Greenplum Database Installation Guide for instructions. This 
utility should be run on the currently active primary master host. 

The utility performs the following steps: 

* Updates the Greenplum Database system catalog to remove the existing 
  standby master host information (if the -r option is supplied) 

* Updates the Greenplum Database system catalog to add the new standby 
  master host information 

* Edits the pg_hba.conf file of the Greenplum Database master to allow 
  access from the newly added standby master. 

* Sets up the standby master instance on the alternate master host 

* Starts the synchronization process 

A backup, standby master host serves as a 'warm standby' in the 
event of the primary master host becoming non-operational. The standby 
master is kept up to date by transaction log replication processes (the 
walsender and walreceiver), which run on the primary master and standby 
master hosts and keep the data between the primary and standby master 
hosts synchronized. If the primary master fails, the log replication 
process is shut down, and the standby master can be activated in its 
place by using the gpactivatestandby utility. Upon activation of the 
standby master, the replicated logs are used to reconstruct the state of 
the master host at the time of the last successfully committed 
transaction. 

The activated standby master effectively becomes the Greenplum Database 
master, accepting client connections on the master port and performing 
normal master operations such as SQL command processing and workload 
management. 


*****************************************************
OPTIONS
*****************************************************

-a

 Do not prompt the user for confirmation. 


-D

 Sets logging level to debug. 


-l <logfile_directory> 

 The directory to write the log file. Defaults to ~/gpAdminLogs. 


-n

 Specify this option to start a Greenplum Database standby master that 
 has been configured but has stopped for some reason. 


-P <port> 

 This option specifies the port that is used by the Greenplum Database 
 standby master. The default is the same port used by the active 
 Greenplum Database master. 

 If the Greenplum Database standby master is on the same host as the 
 active master, the ports must be different. If the ports are the same 
 for the active and standby master and the host is the same, the utility 
 returns an error. (See also -S.)


-S <standby data directory>

 The data directory to use for a new standby master. The default is the same
 directory used by the active master.

 If the standby master is on the same host as the active master, a different
 directory must be provided using this option. (See also -P.)


-q

 Run in quiet mode. Command output is not displayed on the screen, but is 
 still written to the log file. 


-r

 Removes the currently configured standby master host from your Greenplum 
 Database system. 


-s <standby_hostname> 

 The host name of the standby master host. 


-v

 Displays the version, status, last updated date, and check sum of this 
 utility. 


-?

 Displays the online help. 


*****************************************************
EXAMPLES
*****************************************************

Add a standby master host to your Greenplum Database system and start 
the synchronization process: 

gpinitstandby -s host09 

Start an existing standby master host and synchronize the data with the 
current primary master host: 

gpinitstandby -n 

NOTE: Do not specify the -n and -s options in the same command. 


Add a standby master host to your Greenplum Database system specifying a 
different port: 

gpinitstandby -s myhost -P 2222 

If you specify the same host name as the active Greenplum Database 
master, the installed Greenplum Database software that is used as a 
standby master must be in a separate location from the active Greenplum 
Database master.


Remove the existing standby master from your Greenplum system 
configuration: 

gpinitstandby -r 


*****************************************************
SEE ALSO
*****************************************************

gpinitsystem, gpaddmirrors, gpactivatestandby 


